																																		3 May 2000
Chair,
Department of Mathematics and Statistics
University of Ottawa


Dear Sir/Madam,

	I am writing to apprise you of an unsatisfactory situation regarding the MAT2375 course which recently concluded.  We wrote our final exam on 28 April and my concerns with this course derive from the fact that the content of this exam only minimally reflected the material which had been covered in lectures or which had been assigned from the required textbook.  Most of the questions on the final exam either were from a totally unfamiliar area of Statistics or required a mathematical ability far beyond anything that could reasonably be expected from students in a 2nd year course.  As far as I have been able to determine, it is the opinion of every student in this class that the final exam did not represent a fair test of the knowledge and abilities that we had acquired throughout the term.

	This situation was quite surprising to me, in that Professor Zarepour had been one of the finest lecturers I have encountered at University.  However, unfortunately he suddenly developed an intense anger towards the class during the final two or three weeks of the term.  He became very upset that some students were working on assignments during lectures or were arriving mid-way through a lecture and handing in an assignment.  Perhaps this anger was understandable towards certain individuals, but he was clearly not justified in becoming hostile towards the class as a whole.  By far the majority of students handed their assignments in on time and appreciated the skill and warmth Professor Zarepour had displayed while lecturing.

	At first, I personally was not worried about the result of the final exam because I assumed that once Professor Zarepour had punished the class with such an unreasonable exam, that his anger would be assuaged and he would assess the final exam in such a way as to provide an appropriate range of overall course marks.  Many students do not share this belief though.  We cannot be sure that he will recover from his current unreasonable state, and if Professor Zarepour marks the final exam in the same frame of mind as he demonstrated during the final weeks of term, then it is extremely unlikely that any student will pass the final exam, and consequently many students will receive a failing grade for the course as a whole.

	Accordingly, most students are extremely worried about this, and thus I am informing you of this situation now.  Hopefully, things will work out and no more will need to be undertaken concerning this matter.  But, if things do not work out, then this will be a first step towards finding a reasonable solution for all concerned in this situation.  Thank you for your time.  If you wish to discuss any of these matters in more detail, then please do not hesitate to contact me.


Sincerely,

Mark Sattolo
Stud.#428500
