 CSI 3105                    ASSIGNMENT 3                       Fall, 2000
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------------

 Due Date: Wednesday, November 15, 2000, by 12:00 (noon) in the appropriate
           locked CSI 3105 hand-in box, third floor, MacDonald Hall.

 On your assignment and all future assignments, you MUST include the
 following (failure to do so will result in an immediate LOSS OF 5 MARKS):
 i)    Your name in the form FIRST NAME followed by LAST NAME.
 ii)   Your Student ID number at University of Ottawa.
 iii)  The section in which you are REGISTERED, which I would like you to
       list as CSI 3105A (even though the section is actually 3105) or
       CSI 3105B. The CSI 3105A students have the tues/fri. classes, and
       the CSI 3105B students have the mon/wed. classes.
       
 Please be sure to explain all of your solutions carefully and clearly.
 To be complete, any worst case analysis you do must state the input size,
 the basic operations being counted, and an input which gives the worst case
 (you should state these things in your solution, even
 if some of them are given in the question).

 This assignment will be marked out of 60.

1.  [15 marks]
    Consider the following problem.  You have an endless supply of 5 cent,
    4 cent and 1 cent stamps.  You need to send a letter, and it will cost
    you N cents.  You really dislike licking the stamps, so you wish to
    figure out which stamps to use so that you use as few stamps as possible
    and such that the amount on the letter is exactly N.

    For example:
    If N=27, then there several ways to get N, such as:
    * 5 of the 5 cent stamps, 2 of the 1 cent stamps, for a total of 7
      stamps
    * 4 of the 5 cent stamps, 1 of the 4 cent stamps and 3 of the 1 cent
      stamps, for a total of 8 stamps
    * 3 of the 5 cent stamps, 3 of 4 cent stamps, for a total of 6 stamps
      (which turns out to be the best solution, using the fewest stamps)

   a)  Design and describe a dynamic programming algorithm for this problem
       for a general value of N.
       Here is my hint:  Suppose the last stamp I lick has value k.  Then the
       best solution will be the best solution for value N - k, plus 1 for the
       last stamp. Of course, I have to consider the fact that I have 3 values
       for k to check.

   b)  Illustrate your algorithm for the example above (i.e. for N = 27)

   c)  Do a complexity analysis of your algorithm, counting the number of
       comparisons.  Use N as your input size (even though N doesn't
       really represent the size of the data).


2.  [12 marks]
    Suppose you are given a directed graph G=(V,E), and a specific node
    k in V.  You wish to answer the following question:  Does node k
    have the same number of in-neighbours as out-neighbours (i.e. does
    node k have the same in-degree and out-degree)? Discuss CLEARLY what
    the complexity would be to answer this question for each of the
    following data structures for G (which were discussed in class).  Note
    that while discussing the complexity, you will need to give some
    desciption regarding HOW you would solve this problem in each case (this
    description does not have to be detailed pseudocode, but instead
    should be a clear description in English regarding what part of the
    data structure you need to scan and why--enough that you can
    talk about the complexity).  For your analysis, count the number of
    "looks" you make in the data structures.

    a)  Edge list
    b)  Adjacency matrix
    c)  Adjacency list (where it is the out-neighbours listed)

3.  [10 marks]
    Consider the following adjacency matrix for a graph G=(V,E) whose nodes
    are labelled v1, v2,..., v7 (I have used the symbol * to denote infinity):
       
        0  1  *  6  *  7  *
        1  0  5  9  *  8  *
        *  5  0  2  4  *  *
 W =    6  9  2  0  *  9  9
        *  *  4  *  0  *  9
        7  8  *  9  *  0  3
        *  *  *  9  9  3  0

a)  Draw (as nicely as you can) the graph G associated with W.

b)  Using Prim's algorithm as taught in class, find a MST for G.  Your
    solution must include the following:

    i)  The values for the Nearest and Distance arrays for each iteration
        0, 1, ..., 7 of the repeat loop (note that iteration 0 represents the
        initial values).

   ii)  A list stating the order the nodes were added to the tree (starting
        with node v1, of course).

   iii) A drawing of your MST on the graph G, plus a statement regarding the
        cost of that MST.


4.  [5 marks]
    Using Dijkstra's algorithm, as discussed in class, solve the shortest
    path problem for the digraph which is shown on page 255 in your text
    (use node v1 as the root). For each of the n stages of the algorithm,
    show a picture of the digraph, and the current shortest path tree and node
    labels for the algorithm.

5.  [5 marks]
    Consider the Matrix Chain Multiplication problem, for which we learned
    a dynamic programming algorithm.  Suppose that we found that this
    algorithm was too painful for words, and so we decided to try to
    design a greedy algorithm for this problem instead.  Let the matrix chain
    consist of matrices A1*A2*A3*...*An, where each matrix Ai has dimensions
    di-1 x di (this is the same notation we used in class).  Consider the
    following idea for a greedy algorithm:

    First multiply the two matrices whose common dimension di is the smallest,
    and continue with this idea. 

    Show that this greedy algorithm does not always work by providing an
    example of a matrix chain problem with three matrices for which the
    above greedy algorithm fails.  You must also provide the two solutions,
    i.e. the one from the greedy algorithm, and the optimal solution, to
    demonstrate that the algorithm fails for your example.

6.  [5 marks]
    Using the algorithm provided in class, solve the following stable
    marriage problem where, of course, the ladies do the asking (you do not
    need to show your work for this question, just your final solution):

    Women    Preverence List         Men     Preference List
    -----    ---------------        -----    ---------------
      K      (B, A, D, C)             A       (L, N, K, M)
      L      (D, C, A, B)             B       (M, K, N, L)  
      M      (A, D, C, B)             C       (L, M, K, N)
      N      (B, A, D, C)             D       (N, K, M, L)


7.  [8 marks]
    Consider the following problem:

    At a small but growing airport, the local airline company is purchasing
    a new tractor to bring luggage to and from the airplanes.
    A new mechanized luggage system will be installed in 3 years, so the
    tractor will not be needed after that.  However, because it will receive
    heavy use, and maintenance costs are high, it may still be more
    economical to replace the tractor after 1 or 2 years.  The following table
    gives the total net discounted cost associated with purchasing a tractor
    in year i and trading it in in year j (where year 0 is now):

          i \ j |    1    2   3
          ----------------------
            0   |    8   18   31
                |
            1   |   --   10   21
                |
            2   |   --   --   12

    The problem is to determine at what times the tractor should be replaced
    (if ever) to minimize the total costs for tractors.

    The above problem can be formulated as a shortest path problem.  Describe
    how, and show the shortest path problem (i.e. the weighted digraph) for
    this problem.  Note that I DO NOT WANT YOU TO SOLVE this problem, only
    show me the model.
